
Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Nov 1, 2020.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome?


Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS) is a condition defined by the presence of abnormal antibodies and a tendency to form blood clots or to have miscarriages.

People with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome produce antibodies that interact with certain proteins in the blood. This causes the blood to clot more than normal. The most commonly measured antiphospholipid antibodies include lupus anticoagulant and antibodies to cardiolipin or beta-2 glycoprotein.

The blood clots often form in the leg veins. The clots also can form in arteries. The blood clots may occur in any organ, but they tend to favor the lungs, brain, kidneys, heart and skin.

There are two types of APS: primary and secondary. People with primary APS do not have any associated condition. The secondary form is associated with another immune disorder, such as lupus, an infection or, rarely, the use of a medication (such as chlorpromazine or procainamide).

A person may have a blood test that detects antiphospholipid antibodies. This does not necessarily mean that he or she has APS or will develop symptoms or problems of APS.

Symptoms


The symptoms of APS can include any of the following:

Nervous system. APS can cause:

In a form of APS called Sneddon's syndrome, people have repeated strokes. They also have a mottling of the skin that is lacy purple and white.

Some people with APS develop a syndrome similar to multiple sclerosis. They can have:

Stroke
  Slurred speechDifficulty understanding or forming wordsChange in visionWeakness on one side of the bodyInvoluntary jerking movements of the arms or legsDementiaMigrainesOther problems of the nervous system


Difficulty urinating
Difficulty walking
Double vision
Numbness
Heart and blood vessels. APS can lead to:
 Heart attacks (Up to 20% of younger people who have a heart attack have antiphospholipid antibodies.)
  Heart valve problems that can mimic bacterial endocarditisBlood clots in the upper chambers of the heartDeep vein thrombosis (blood clot in a vein) that can pain and swelling in a leg or arm; these clots can travel to the lungs (see below) and cause difficulty breathing or even death




Blood cells. Some people with a condition called immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) have antiphospholipid antibodies. The primary problem in ITP is low platelets, the blood cells that aid clot formation and prevent excessive bleeding. Over time, some people with ITP develop APS. People with ITP and APS can have problems with excessive clotting and excessive bleeding.

Also, red blood cells can break down abnormally. This may cause fatigue, dizziness and pale skin. This is more common in people with lupus and secondary APS.

Lung. Blood clots in the lung can cause:

Repeated clots can cause elevated pressure in the blood vessels around the lungs. This may cause the person to be constantly short of breath.

Chest pain
Shortness of breath
Rapid breathing


Gastrointestinal. APS can affect the blood supply to the intestines, causing:
 Abdominal painFeverBlood in the stool

APS can cause a condition called Budd-Chiari syndrome. In this syndrome, a blood clot prevents blood from flowing out of the liver. The person may experience:

Nausea
Vomiting
Jaundice (yellow skin)
Dark urine
Pale stool
Swelling of the abdomen
Kidneys. Blood clots that affect the kidneys can cause kidney damage and blood in the urine.
Skin. APS can cause:
 Purple and white mottling of the skinRepeated sores (ulcers)Repeated bumps (nodules)Tissue in the fingertips to die (gangrene)
Eyes. Veins or arteries in the retina can be affected. This can cause blurring or loss of vision.

Pregnancy.


APS can cause problems for the pregnant woman such as stroke or blood clots in the lungs.

APS may be associated with a syndrome of pregnancy known as HELLP. HELLP stands for hemolysis (breakdown of red blood cells), elevated liver tests and low platelets.

In addition, APS may be complicated by:

Recurrent miscarriage which can occur early or late in pregnancy
A partial or complete separation of the placenta from the uterus before the baby is born
A small placenta
Premature birth

Diagnosis

Many symptoms that occur with APS are common even without the condition. They do not necessarily mean APS is the cause.

However, a doctor may order tests to detect the antibodies associated with APS when:

Blood clots or miscarriages occur for no apparent reason
A young person has a heart attack or stroke

People with antiphospholipid antibodies may have a positive screening test for syphilis even though they do not have the disease. Fortunately, confirmatory tests are available to rule out syphilis infection in a person with antiphospholipid antibodies.

Expected Duration

Some people with APS continue to have symptoms off and on throughout their lives. Others improve without any repeat episodes.

Some people even lose the antibodies associated with the syndrome. This can happen with primary APS. But it is especially common:

After a viral infection
In women who recently were pregnant
When a medication suspected to be associated with APS is no longer used

Prevention

There is no known way to reliably prevent APS, although vaccination for viral infections (including influenza) could reduce the risk of APS triggered by viral infection. However, lifestyle changes can reduce the likelihood of blood clots.

To reduce your risk of blood clots:

Quit smoking
Increase physical activity
Avoid medications (if possible) that are suspected of increasing the risk of blood clots or causing APS; discuss this with your doctor before stopping any medications

Treatment

If you have antiphospholipid antibodies but have not had blood clots or a miscarriage, your doctor may recommend that you take a low-dose aspirin every day. However, aspirin may increase your risks of bleeding or stomach problems. You and your doctor will have to determine whether the uncertain benefits are worth the risks for you.

For people with a history of blood clots as part of APS, doctors usually prescribe a powerful blood thinner called warfarin (Coumadin). This medication usually is taken for life. People who take warfarin need to have their blood tested regularly. That's because if the blood is too thin, the risk of bleeding increases. If it is not thin enough, clotting is more likely. Other blood thinners (including dabigatran, apixaban, and rivaroxaban) appear to be less effective than warfarin.

Another commonly used blood thinner is called heparin. It may be used before you start taking warfarin. Heparin also is used for pregnant women, because warfarin is not safe for the developing fetus. Heparin is only available as an injection.


A woman with APS who is trying to become pregnant after repeated miscarriages may increase the chance of a successful pregnancy by getting heparin injections and taking low-dose aspirin. This treatment should start as soon as the pregnancy is discovered. It continues until just before delivery.

Other medications may be recommended for advanced cases of APS include:

Steroids
Immune-suppressing drugs
Antiglobulin medications
Plasma exchange (a blood filtering procedure)
Statin medications
Hydroxychloroquine

However, the benefits of these medications as primary treatment have not been proven but may be added to other treatments (such as warfarin) if the condition has been difficult to treat.

