
Celiac Disease (Non-Tropical Sprue)

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on May 30, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Celiac Disease (Non-Tropical Sprue)?


Celiac disease (also called non-tropical sprue, celiac sprue, gluten intolerance and gluten-sensitive enteropathy) is an intestinal disorder in which the body cannot tolerate gluten. Gluten is a natural protein in many grains, including wheat, barley, rye and oats.

People with celiac disease have an immune reaction that is triggered by gluten. The immune reaction causes inflammation at the surface of the small intestine where it damages small structures - villi - on the surface of the intestine. It also damages smaller, hair-sized protrusions called microvilli. Healthy villi and microvilli are needed for normal digestion. When they are damaged, the intestine cannot absorb nutrients properly and you can become malnourished.



A tendency to develop celiac disease is genetic (inherited). Celiac disease is most common among people of northern European descent. Celiac disease is not always recognized because the symptoms can be mild and can be wrongly blamed upon other common intestinal issues. Celiac disease can be diagnosed at any age.


Celiac disease is an autoimmune condition because the body's own immune system damages the intestinal villi, even though the process is started by eating gluten. People with celiac disease also are more likely to develop other autoimmune diseases, such as thyroid disease and type 1 diabetes. A few conditions frequently coexist with celiac disease, including dermatitis herpetiformis (an itchy, blistering skin rash) and liver inflammation. People who have Down syndrome have a higher risk of developing celiac disease than is typical.

Symptoms

Symptoms and their severity can vary. Some symptoms come from inflammation in the intestines. Other symptoms come from a lack of nutrients, due to the failure of your intestine to digest food properly.

Children generally develop symptoms only after they start eating foods that contain gluten. Common symptoms include:

Upset stomach  
Failure to grow normally (often called "failure to thrive") or delayed growth  
Weight loss  
Painful abdominal bloating or distention  
Pale, foul-smelling, greasy stools  
Chronic (long-lasting) or recurring diarrhea  
Irritability

In adults, symptoms may include:

Chronic diarrhea that does not get better with medication  
Foul-smelling, greasy, pale stool  
Gassiness  
Recurring abdominal bloating  
Weight loss  
Fatigue  
Infertility, lack of menstruation  
Bone or joint pain  
Depression, irritability or mood changes  
Neurological problems, including weakness, poor balance, seizures, headaches, or numbness or tingling in the legs  
Itchy, painful skin rash (dermatitis herpetiformis)  
Tooth discoloration or loss of enamel, sores on lips or tongue  
Other signs of vitamin deficiency, such as scaly skin or hyperkeratosis (from lack of vitamin A), or bleeding gums or bruising easily (from lack of vitamin K)


Diagnosis

Celiac disease will cause symptoms as long as you continue to eat gluten. If a person with celiac disease follows a strict gluten-free diet, the intestines can heal and the disease can be controlled. Any exposure to gluten can trigger a recurrence of symptoms.

Expected Duration

Celiac disease will cause symptoms as long as you continue to eat gluten. If a person with celiac disease follows a strict gluten-free diet, the intestines can heal and the disease can be controlled. Any exposure to gluten can trigger a recurrence of symptoms.

Prevention

Because celiac disease is a genetic disorder and because gluten is encountered in almost everyone's diet, there is no practical way to prevent it. If it does occur, you can stop intestinal damage and eliminate your symptoms by following a strict, gluten-free diet. Although it is not proven, some experts suspect that if celiac disease runs in your family you may be able to delay the disease for your own children or reduce the likelihood that they will get the disease by breast-feeding, so that you delay the introduction of other foods to your infant's diet.

Treatment

Effective treatment sounds simple: Just eliminate gluten from your diet, the intestinal damage will be cured over time, and your symptoms will go away. That's easier said than done, however.

Many products contain gluten. Some products, especially prepared foods, may not list gluten as an ingredient. Today there are many online and print publications to help people with celiac disease avoid gluten in their diet.

Here are some basic tips on avoiding gluten:

Avoid cereals, breads or other grain products that include wheat, rye, barley or oats. This includes white or whole-wheat flour (including cookies, crackers, cakes and most other baked goods), semolina, couscous, bread crumbs, most pastas and malt.  
Avoid processed cheese, cheese mixes, low-fat or fat-free cottage cheese or sour cream.  
Avoid any dairy products, such as yogurt or ice cream that contain fillers or additives.  
Avoid canned soups or soup mixes.  
Avoid creamed vegetables.  
Avoid products that contain modified food starch, food starch, hydrolyzed vegetable protein, stabilizers, or fat replacers or substitutes.  
Avoid prepared or processed meats.  
Avoid beer, gin and whiskey.  
Avoid flavored coffee, malted milk or herbal tea with malted barley.  
Look for products marked "gluten-free." As more attention is being given to this disease, more products are becoming available.  
Foods that do not contain gluten include products made with soybean or tapioca flours, rice, corn, buckwheat or potatoes. Other gluten-free foods include nuts; fresh fish, meat or poultry; fresh, frozen or canned vegetables without sauces; wine; and plain, natural cheeses and yogurt.  
Current evidence suggests up to 2 ounces of oats each day may be tolerated well by people with celiac disease.


