
Contact Dermatitis

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Mar 11, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Contact Dermatitis?


Contact dermatitis is skin inflammation. It occurs because the skin has been exposed to a substance that irritates it or causes an allergic reaction.

Many natural and artificial chemicals can trigger contact dermatitis. These include ingredients found in:

Antibiotic ointments 
Cosmetics 
Fabric finishes 
Household cleaners 
Industrial solvents 
Laundry detergents 
Metal jewelry 
Perfumes 
Shampoos  
Soaps


Common skin exposure (contact) that can lead to contact dermatitis includes:

Applying makeup or hair dye 
Hand washing 
Hiking near poison ivy, oak or sumac 
Housecleaning 
Shampooing hair 
Sitting near a campfire where poison ivy is being burned. 
Spraying or dabbing on perfume 
Wearing a diaper 
Wearing a metal necklace or bracelet that contains nickel 
Wearing clothes with metal snaps or zippers 
Working with industrial solvents



Doctors classify contact dermatitis into two types. The type depends on the cause of inflammation:

Irritant contact dermatitis. This is triggered by exposure to a chemical that is poisonous (toxic) or irritating to the skin. It is not an allergic reaction.

In children, the most common form of irritant contact dermatitis is "diaper rash." This is a skin reaction in the diaper area. It is caused by prolonged contact with the natural chemicals found in urine and stool. Childhood irritant contact dermatitis also can develop around the mouth because of skin contact with dribbles of baby food or drools of saliva.

In adults, this condition is often an occupational illness. It is triggered by exposure to strong soaps, solvents or cutting agents. It is especially common among:

Hairdressers 
Health care workers 
Homemakers 
Janitors 
Machinists  
Mechanics


But it can occur in anyone whose household chores or hobbies involve exposure to irritating chemicals.

Allergic contact dermatitis. This is an immune reaction. It occurs only in people who are naturally oversensitive to certain chemicals.

With allergic contact dermatitis, the inflammation may not develop until 24 to 36 hours after contact with the allergen. This is because allergic contact dermatitis involves the body's immune defenses. The immune response is a process that takes some time.

Skin allergies vary from person to person. The most common types of allergens responsible are:

A chemical found in poison ivy, oak and sumac 
Nickel and cobalt in metal jewelry, clothing snaps, zippers and metal-plated objects 
Latex in gloves and rubberized clothing 
Neomycin in antibiotic skin ointments 
Potassium dichromate, a tanning agent found in leather shoes and clothing 
Certain preservatives, such as formaldehyde



Symptoms

Symptoms of contact dermatitis may vary slightly, depending on the cause.

Irritant contact dermatitis. In mild cases, there may be only mild redness of the skin. More severe cases may cause skin swelling, blistering or ulceration.

Symptoms usually begin right after exposure to the harmful substance. They are limited to areas of the skin that have been in direct contact with the irritant. For example, a janitor may develop symptoms on his hands after washing the floor with a strong detergent.

Allergic contact dermatitis. This usually causes skin redness, blistering and severe itching. Symptoms may not appear for several hours or even days after exposure.


The location and pattern of the skin reaction may provide clues to the cause of the problem. For example, poison ivy usually appears as a pattern of tiny lines or streaks in places where plant leaves have brushed against the skin. Allergies to metal jewelry often cause rings of skin inflammation around the neck and wrist.

Contact dermatitis can become a long-lasting (chronic) condition. This is more likely if:

Symptoms of either type of dermatitis are not treated 
The skin continues to be exposed to the substance that is triggering the skin reaction

In chronic contact dermatitis, the skin eventually becomes thick, scaly and dry. Skin color changes and there are areas of hair loss.

Diagnosis

Depending on your pattern of skin symptoms, the doctor will ask about your:

Contact with poisonous plants 
History of exposure to irritating chemicals at work or at home 
Personal and family allergy history

In some cases, your doctor may need to ask for the names of specific ingredients in your personal care products. In particular, the doctor will ask about:

Antibiotic skin ointments. 
Cosmetics 
Hair dyes 
Nail polish  
Shampoos 
Skin lotions

After reviewing your history of allergies and chemical exposures, your doctor usually can confirm the diagnosis of contact dermatitis by examining your skin.

If your doctor suspects allergic contact dermatitis and cannot identify the likely allergen, your doctor may refer you to a dermatologist for patch testing. Small amounts of specific allergens are applied to the skin of your back, and then covered with tape. After 48 hours, the doctor removes the tape. He or she examines the skin for signs of an allergic reaction. A second reading is done after three to seven days.

Expected Duration

With proper treatment, your symptoms probably will clear up within two to three weeks. However, you must stop exposing your skin to the irritating substance.

If you continue to have long-term exposure to harmful chemicals or allergens, you eventually may develop symptoms of chronic contact dermatitis. This can last for many years.

Prevention

In general, you can prevent contact dermatitis by avoiding exposure to irritating chemicals, plants, jewelry and

n general, you can prevent contact dermatitis by avoiding exposure to irritating chemicals, plants, jewelry and other substances that trigger irritant or allergic contact dermatitis.

To help prevent diaper dermatitis:

Change baby diapers frequently 
Clean the soiled area with warm water and a soft cloth  
Avoid using store-bought wipes and cleansers on your child's skin. These products can trigger skin reactions. 
Apply a protective coat of zinc oxide ointment


Treatment

Your doctor usually will treat contact dermatitis with the following:

An oral antihistamine to control the itch. Common antihistamines include: 

 Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) Hydroxyzine (Atarax) Cetirizine (Zyrtec) Loratadine (Claritin)  Fexofenadine (Allegra)

Of these, the last three are less likely to cause drowsiness.

A corticosteroid to relieve skin inflammation. In most cases, the corticosteroid can be applied as a cream or ointment. If symptoms are severe, corticosteroids can be given by mouth or by injection. 
A moisturizer to help restore the normal texture of the skin. Your doctor may suggest a nonirritating ointment or cream that contains few potential allergens. Examples include: 
 Petroleum jelly Vanicream Cetaphil Eucerin

For many people, oatmeal baths (Aveeno) also help.

