
Delusional Disorder

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Jun 6, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Delusional Disorder?


Delusional disorder is classified as a psychotic disorder, a disorder where a person has trouble recognizing reality. A delusion is a false belief that is based on an incorrect interpretation of reality. Delusions, like all psychotic symptoms, can occur as part of many different psychiatric disorders. But the term delusional disorder is used when delusions are the most prominent symptom.

A person with this illness holds a false belief firmly, despite clear evidence or proof to the contrary. Delusions may involve circumstances that could occur in reality even though they are unlikely (for example, the family next door plotting to kill you). Or they may be considered "bizarre" (for example, feeling controlled by an outside force or having thoughts inserted into your head). A religious or cultural belief that is accepted by other members of the person's community is not a delusion.

There are several types of delusions: persecutory, erotic, grandiose, jealous or somatic (that is, delusions about the body). People with delusional disorder usually do not have hallucinations or a major problem with mood. Unlike people with schizophrenia, they tend not to have major problems with day-to-day functioning. Other than behaviors related to delusional content, they do not appear odd.

When hallucinations do occur, they are part of the delusional belief. For example, someone who has the delusion that internal organs are rotting may hallucinate smells or sensations related to that delusion.


If functioning is impaired, it is usually a direct result of the delusion. Therefore, the disorder may be detected only by observing behavior that is a consequence of the belief. For example, a person who fears being murdered may quit a job or stay home with all the shades drawn, never venturing out.

Since people with delusional disorder are aware that their beliefs are unique, they generally do not talk about them. Delusional disorder is diagnosed much less frequently than schizophrenia.

Symptoms

The main symptom is a persistent delusion or delusions (a fixed belief) – for example, about a situation, condition or action – that is not happening but may be plausible in real life. Types include:

Erotomanic – Delusion of a special, loving relationship with another person, usually someone famous or of higher standing. (This kind of delusion is sometimes at the root of stalking behavior.)
Grandiose – Delusion that the person has a special power or ability, or a special relationship with a powerful person or figure, such as the president, a celebrity or the Pope.
Jealous – Delusion that a sexual partner is being unfaithful.
Persecutory – Delusion that the person is being threatened or maltreated.
Somatic – Delusion of having a physical illness or defect.

Diagnosis

Since delusional disorder is rare, a doctor should evaluate the possibility that another major illness, such as schizophrenia, a mood disorder or a medical problem, is causing the symptoms. Medical causes should be considered, especially later in life. People who develop dementia (for example, Alzheimer's disease) can become delusional.

Making a diagnosis is more difficult when the person with the disorder conceals his or her thoughts. Because the person is convinced of the reality of his or her ideas, he or she may not want treatment. If the person allows it, conversations with supportive family or friends can help. A general medical evaluation is useful. In a few cases, when a medical or neurological problem is suspected, diagnostic tests such as an electroencephalogram (EEG), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) scans may be suggested.

Expected Duration

How long this illness lasts varies a lot. Some people have a persistent delusion that comes and goes in its intensity and significance. In some, the disorder will last only a few months.


Prevention

There is no known way to prevent this disorder.

Treatment

Treatment for this disorder is challenging, especially if the delusion is long lasting. Antipsychotic medications can be helpful, but delusions sometimes do not get better with pharmacological treatment. Since patients may not believe they have a mental disorder, they may refuse all treatment, including psychotherapy. However, support, reassurance, and pointing out the difference between the symptoms and reality can all be helpful if the person is willing to meet with a therapist. Educating the family about how to respond to the person's needs can be useful.

