
Depression

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Aug 24, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Depression?


Depression is more than just a passing blue mood, a "bad day," or temporary sadness. The most common symptom is a low mood that can sometimes appear as irritability. Often the person with depression is not be able to enjoy activities that he or she normally enjoys.

With major depression, there is a profound sadness or a sense of despair. The symptoms of major depression are defined as lasting at least two weeks, but usually they go on much longer.

Other types of depression may have more subtle symptoms. For example, dysthymia, now known as persistent depressive disorder, is less severe than an episode of major depression, but usually lasts longer. Many people with this disorder describe having been depressed as long as they can remember, or feeling as though they go in and out of depression all the time.

A variety of symptoms usually accompany the low mood of any type of depression. And the symptoms can vary significantly among different people.

Many people with depression also have anxiety. They may worry more than average about their physical health. They may have excessive conflict in their relationships or function poorly at work. Sexual functioning may be a problem. People with depression are also at more risk for abusing alcohol or other substances.

Depression probably involves changes in the areas of the brain that control mood. The nerve cells may be functioning poorly in certain regions of the brain. Altered communication between nerve cells or nerve circuits can make it harder for a person's brain to regulate his or her mood.


Hormone changes may also negatively affect mood. An individual’s life experiences can affect these biological processes. And a person's genetic makeup influences how vulnerable he or she is to experiencing depression.

An episode of depression can be triggered by a stressful life event. But in many cases, depression does not appear to be related to a specific event.

A major depressive episode may occur within the first two to three months after giving birth to a baby. In that case, it may be called major depressive disorder with peripartum onset. Most people refer to it as postpartum depression.

Depression that occurs mainly during the winter months is usually called seasonal affective disorder, or SAD. It also may be called major depressive disorder with seasonal pattern.

Episodes of depression can occur at any age. Depression is diagnosed in women twice as often as in men. People who have a family member with major depression are more likely to develop depression or drinking problems.

Symptoms

A depressed person may gain or lose weight, eat more or less than usual, have difficulty concentrating, and have trouble sleeping or sleep more than usual. He or she may feel tired and have no energy for work or play. Small burdens or obstacles may appear impossible to manage. The person can appear slowed down, or agitated and restless. The symptoms can be quite noticeable to others.

A particularly painful symptom of this illness is an unshakable feeling of worthlessness and guilt. The person may feel guilty about a specific life experience, or may feel general guilt not related to anything in particular.

If pain and self-criticism become great enough, they can lead to feelings of hopelessness, self-destructive behavior, or thoughts of death and suicide. The vast majority of people who suffer severe depression do not attempt or commit suicide, but they are more likely to do so than people who are not depressed.

Symptoms of major depression include:

distinctly depressed or irritable mood
loss of interest or pleasure
decreased or increased weight or appetite
decreased or increased sleep
appearing slowed or agitated
fatigue and loss of energy
feeling worthless or guilty
poor concentration or indecisiveness
thoughts of death, or suicide plans or attempts.


People with persistent depressive disorder may have many of the same symptoms. While the symptoms tend to be less severe, they are long-lasting.

Diagnosis

A primary care physician or a mental health professional usually can diagnose depression by asking questions about a person's medical history and symptoms.

Many people with depression do not seek evaluation or treatment because of society’s attitudes about depression. The person may feel the depression is his or her fault or may worry about what others will think. Also, the depression itself may distort a person’s ability to recognize the problem. Therefore, family members or friends may need to encourage someone showing symptoms of depression to seek help.

There are no specific tests for depression. However, it is important to be evaluated by a primary care physician to make sure the symptoms are not being caused by a medical condition or medication.

Expected Duration

On average, untreated episodes last several months. However, episodes of major depression can last any length of time. Symptoms can also vary in intensity during an episode.

If depression is not treated, it can become chronic (long-lasting). Treatment can shorten the length and severity of a depressive episode.

Prevention

There is no way to prevent major depression, but detecting it early can help. Treatment can both reduce symptoms and help to prevent the illness from returning.

Treatment

The most helpful treatment is a combination of psychotherapy and medication. A medication from a class of antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) is often prescribed first. These medications include fluoxetine (Prozac), sertraline (Zoloft), paroxetine (Paxil), citalopram (Celexa), and escitalopram (Lexapro). They are not without problems, but they are fairly easy to take and relatively safe compared with previous generations of antidepressants.

SSRIs are known to cause problems with sexual functioning, some nausea, and an increase in anxiety in the early stages of treatment.

Other effective antidepressants include bupropion (Wellbutrin), venlafaxine (Effexor), mirtazapine (Remeron), and duloxetine (Cymbalta). Two older classes of antidepressants, tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors, are also still in use. They are as effective as the newer ones and can be very useful when someone has not responded well to other treatments.


It usually takes at least two to six weeks of taking an antidepressant to see improvement. It may take several attempts to find the medication that works best. Once the right medication is found, it may take up to a few months to find a proper dose and for the full positive effect to be seen.

Sometimes, two different antidepressants are used together. Or a mood stabilizer, such as lithium (sold under several brand names) or valproic acid (Depakene, Depakote), is added. If psychotic symptoms are present, a doctor may prescribe an antipsychotic medication. These include haloperidol (Haldol), risperidone (Risperdal), ziprasidone (Geodon), aripiprazole (Abilify), and olanzapine (Zyprexa).

A number of different psychotherapy techniques have been demonstrated to be helpful, depending on the causes of the depression, the availability of family and other social support, and an individual's personal style and preference. A technique called cognitive behavioral therapy can help a depressed person recognize negative thinking and teach techniques for controlling symptoms. Other types of therapy, including psychodynamic, insight-oriented, and interpersonal psychotherapy, can help depressed people to sort out conflicts in important relationships or explore the history behind symptoms.

If you suffer from depression, you will benefit from learning all you can about the illness. You can also make use of any support networks that may be available in your community.

In some people with major depression, a treatment called electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) can be a life-saving option. This treatment is controversial, but very effective. In ECT, an electrical impulse is applied to the person’s scalp and passes through to the brain, causing a seizure. The patient is under anesthesia for the entire procedure and is monitored carefully. Medication is given before the procedure to prevent any outward signs of convulsions, which helps to prevent injury. Improvement is seen gradually over a period of days to weeks after the treatment. ECT is the quickest and most effective treatment for the most severe forms of depression, and in most people, it is not any more risky than other antidepressant treatments.

