
Female Infertility

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Jan 25, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Female Infertility?


Most couples who have unprotected sex at least twice per week are able to become pregnant within one year. If pregnancy does not occur after one year, the man and woman are diagnosed as having an infertility problem.

Infertility can result from problems in the man, the woman or both partners. In some couples, no cause of infertility can be found. In other couples, more than one cause exists.

Normal aging reduces a woman's ability to become pregnant. As a woman grows older, ovulation—the process of forming and releasing an egg—becomes slower and less effective.

Aging begins to reduce fertility as early as age 30. Pregnancy rates are very low after age 44. This is true even when fertility medications are used.

Symptoms

The primary symptom of infertility is difficulty getting pregnant. Various causes of infertility may result in additional symptoms.

Any of the following problems may cause infertility:

Infrequent ovulation. When your periods do not come every month, you have infrequent ovulation.


Common causes of infrequent ovulation include:

Body stresses such as:
 Eating disordersUnusually ambitious exercise trainingRapid weight lossLow body weightObesity
Some hormonal abnormalities such as:
 Thyroid problemsPituitary-gland problemsAdrenal-gland problemsPolycystic ovary syndrome

Hormonal abnormalities can delay or prevent the ovaries from releasing an egg. Symptoms that suggest a hormone abnormality include:

Unexpected weight loss or gain
Fatigue
Excessive hair growth or hair loss
Acne
Ovarian cysts. Cysts in the ovary can cause pelvic pain. They also can interfere with the normal process of ovulation.

Scarring in the fallopian tubes. This can prevent pregnancy by stopping the egg from traveling into the uterus.

Damage can result from:

A previous surgery
A previous ectopic (tubal) pregnancy
Endometriosis
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). PID is a bacterial infection in the pelvis. It often scars, damages or blocks the fallopian tubes.

Abnormalities in the shape or lining of the uterus, such as fibroid tumors or uterine polyps. These conditions also can cause:
 Heavy menstrual bleedingPelvic painEnlargement of the uterus


Scar tissue can develop within the uterus as a complication of:

Uterine infections
Miscarriages
Abortions
Surgical procedures such as a dilation and curettage (D&C)

Such scar tissue can lead to infrequent periods or minimal menstrual flow.



Diagnosis

The first step in diagnosing female infertility is determining whether ovulation is occurring at predictable intervals. When an egg is released, it causes a shift in the body's sex hormones.

This shift in sex hormones can be detected with these tests:

Early-morning core body temperature. You use a precise (basal body) thermometer to take your temperature first thing every morning. You will detect a slightly higher temperature after ovulation.
Ovulation predictor test. This is an over-the-counter urine test. It can predict egg release. A positive test means you have ovulated recently or are about to ovulate. 
Vaginal mucus. You may be able to recognize changes in the appearance and consistency of your vaginal mucus. These changes signal hormone shifts that show ovulation has occurred.

Your doctor will examine your vagina and pelvic organs. A sample of mucus from your cervix and vagina may be tested for possible infection.

If necessary, blood tests may be used to:

Confirm normal ovulation
Show whether the ovaries are functioning well enough to release eggs
Measure the function of your thyroid, pituitary and adrenal glands


Other tests may also help to determine the cause of infertility. These examine the physical structure of pelvic organs.

Hysterosalpingogram. This is an X-ray study in which a liquid dye is injected into your uterus. It reveals problems such as polyps and fibroid tumors in the uterus. It can also reveal partial or complete blockage of the fallopian tubes.
Ultrasound. An ultrasound reveals the shape and size of the uterus. It gives some information about the uterine cavity or inner lining. An ultrasound can identify the shape and size of the ovaries and the presence of developing cysts.
Hysteroscopyand laparoscopy. These are surgical procedures performed by a gynecologist. Both procedures use a small video camera to view the pelvic organs.

During a hysteroscopy, your doctor can see the inside of your uterus. He or she can obtain biopsies. In some cases, the doctor can remove polyps, fibroids or scar tissue.

Laparoscopy allows your doctor to view the outside of your uterus and inspect your ovaries. Sometimes, it is possible to remove ovarian cysts or scar tissue during a laparoscopy.

Expected Duration

A fertility evaluation usually extends over several months. The evaluation requires numerous tests. Some tests must be done during a specific time in the menstrual cycle.

The treatments also require time, careful planning and repeated office visits.

With continued frequent sexual intercourse, infertile couples have a small chance of getting pregnant even without treatment.

Prevention

You can optimize your chances of getting pregnant in a number of ways.

Exercise moderately. Do not exercise so heavily that your menstrual periods are infrequent or absent.
Maintain a healthy weight. A good goal is a body mass index (BMI) of at least 20 and below 27.

Avoid smoking.

Limit caffeine. High intake of caffeinated drinks may impair fertility.
Review your medicines with your doctor. Some medications can affect your ability to conceive or carry a normal pregnancy.
Consider following a "fertility diet." Women who do the following may have better rates of fertility:
 Eating more beans, nuts and other fertility-boosting plant proteinEating more whole grainsAvoiding sugary sodasHaving a glass of whole milk and other full-fat dairy food every day (even including an occasional small bowl of ice cream)

Some treatments for cancer can cause infertility. Certain techniques allow a woman planning to undergo chemotherapy or radiation to later have a baby from her own egg. Discuss these with your doctor before beginning cancer treatment.

Treatment

Treatment depends on the results of your infertility evaluation. Some causes of infertility have a specific treatment. For example, surgery may be done to remove a fibroid tumor.

