
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD)

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Feb 23, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD)?


Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is commonly called heartburn. This digestive disorder most often causes a burning and sometimes squeezing sensation in the mid-chest.

In GERD, acid and digestive enzymes from the stomach flow backwards into the esophagus, the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach. This backward flow of stomach juices is called "reflux". These caustic stomach juices inflame the lining of the esophagus. If GERD is not treated, it can permanently damage the esophagus.

A muscular ring seals the esophagus from the stomach. This ring is called the esophageal sphincter. Normally, the sphincter opens when you swallow, allowing food into your stomach. The rest of the time, it squeezes tight to prevent food and acid in the stomach from backing up into the esophagus.

In most people with GERD, however, the esophageal sphincter does not seal tightly. It remains relaxed between swallows. This allows digestive juices to enter the esophagus and irritate the esophageal lining.

Many things can weaken or loosen the lower esophageal sphincter. These include:

Certain foods
Smoking
Alcohol
Pregnancy
Many medications
Increased abdominal pressure, because of obesity or pregnancy
A bulge in the stomach (hiatal hernia) that protrudes above the diaphragm




Prolonged exposure to acid can cause the esophagus to:

Become inflamed
Narrow
Develop an open sore



Long-term exposure to acid also can lead to a condition called Barrett's esophagus. Barrett's esophagus increases the risk of esophageal cancer.

For many people with GERD, heartburn is not merely an occasional discomfort. Rather, it is a frequent, even daily, ordeal.

Symptoms


Symptoms of GERD may include:

Sharp or burning chest pain behind the breastbone. This is also known as heartburn. It is the most common symptom of GERD. Heartburn may be worse when you eat, bend over or lie down.
Tightness in your chest or upper abdomen. The pain may wake you up in the middle of the night.
Regurgitation, the backflow of stomach fluids into your mouth
Nausea
A recurring sour or bitter taste in the mouth
Difficulty swallowing
Hoarseness, especially in the morning
Sore throat
Coughing, wheezing or repeatedly needing to clear your throat

Diagnosis

Your doctor will ask you:

How often you have heartburn or other symptoms of GERD
Whether your symptoms are worse when you lie down or bend over
Whether your symptoms are relieved by over-the-counter heartburn remedies

Your doctor also will review your current medications. Some medications can loosen the esophageal sphincter. These include:

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen and naproxen
Blood pressure or heart medications such as calcium channel blockers and nitroglycerin
Osteoporosis drugs called bisphosphonates
Progestins, such as progesterone
Medicines that reduce the amount of saliva you produce, such as antihistamines and antidepressants

Pain that feels like heartburn also can be a symptom of coronary artery disease. Your doctor may ask whether you have any symptoms of heart problems. He or she may test for heart problems.

If your only complaint is mild heartburn and your physical examination is normal, your doctor may suggest lifestyle changes and over-the-counter medications. You may not need any special diagnostic testing or prescription treatment.

If you have more serious symptoms, or if your heartburn is not relieved by medications, you will need further testing. Serious symptoms include severe, long-lasting heartburn, difficulty swallowing or weight loss.


The best test for GERD is an endoscopy. The doctor looks directly at your esophagus with an endoscope. This is a flexible tube that can be passed through the mouth and throat. Endoscopy is usually is done by a gastroenterology specialist.

During endoscopy, your doctor may take a small sample of tissue to be examined in a laboratory. Your doctor also may look at your stomach and first part of the small intestines with the endoscope.

You also may have one or more of the following tests:

Barium swallow — An X-ray test that outlines the esophagus.
Cardiac evaluation — To check for heart disease.
Esophageal manometry or motility studies — To check the squeezing motion of your esophagus when you are swallowing.
Esophageal pH monitoring — Uses electrodes to measure the pH (acid level) in the esophagus. It is usually done over a 24-hour period.

Expected Duration

Without treatment, GERD is typically a long-term problem.

Symptoms may be relieved within days of treatment. But for many patients, several weeks of treatment are needed before symptoms lessen or resolve.

Treatment often has to continue for a long period. Even with daily medication, many people with reflux continue to have symptoms.

Prevention

There are a lot of things you can do to prevent the symptoms of GERD. Some simple lifestyle changes include:

Elevate the head of your bed at least six inches. If possible, put wooden blocks under the legs at the head of the bed. Or, use a solid foam wedge under the head portion of the mattress. Simply using extra pillows may not help. Lying on your left side also can help reduce acid reflux.
Avoid foods that cause the esophageal sphincter to relax during their digestion. These include:
 CoffeeChocolateFatty foodsWhole milkPeppermintSpearmint
Limit acidic foods that make the irritation worse when they are regurgitated. These include citrus fruits and tomatoes.
Avoid carbonated beverages. Burps of gas force the esophageal sphincter to open and can promote reflux.
Eat smaller, more frequent meals.
Do not lie down after eating.
Do not eat during the three to four hours before you go to bed.
If you smoke, quit.
Avoid drinking alcohol. It loosens the esophageal sphincter.
Lose weight if you are obese. Obesity can make it harder for the esophageal sphincter to stay closed.
Avoid wearing tight-fitting garments. Increased pressure on the abdomen can open the esophageal sphincter.
Use lozenges or gum to keep producing saliva.


Treatment

Treatment for most people with GERD includes lifestyle changes as described above and medication. If symptoms persist, surgery or endoscopy treatments are other options.

