
Hodgkin Lymphoma

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Aug 4, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Hodgkin Lymphoma?


Hodgkin lymphoma is a cancer of the immune system. It is also called Hodgkin disease. Hodgkin lymphoma is one of the most curable forms of cancer. It begins in the part of the immune system called the lymph system. The lymph system is made up of an intricate network of immune cells, small blood-vessel-like structures called lymphatics, and lymph nodes. It also includes organs made primarily of immune cells such as the spleen and thymus gland. The lymph (or lymphatic) system helps fights infections and other diseases.

The lymph system includes:

Lymph: A clear fluid that carries white blood cells (especially lymphocytes) through the lymph system. White blood cells help fight infection.
Lymph vessels (lymphatics): A network of thin tubes. They carry lymph from different parts of the body to the bloodstream.
Lymph nodes: Small masses of tissue that store white blood cells. They also remove bacteria and other substances from the lymph. Lymph nodes reside throughout the body, including the neck, underarms, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and groin.
Spleen: An organ near the stomach that:
Makes lymphocytes
Filters the blood
Stores blood cells
Destroys old blood cells
Thymus gland: a gland located in the central portion of the chest near the heart. The gland consists of lymphocytes that are important in immune function especially in children and young adults


The lymph system also consists of the thymus, tonsils, and bone marrow and gastrointestinal tract.

Hodgkin lymphoma can begin almost anywhere. It can spread to almost any tissue or organ. The disease starts when a change occurs to the genetic material of a lymphocyte. This turns the lymphocyte into a large, abnormal cell. Hodgkin lymphoma is distinguished by these unique cancer cells, called Reed-Sternberg cells. The abnormal cells begin dividing out of control. They often go on to form tumor masses in lymph nodes and elsewhere.

Most patients with Hodgkin lymphoma can be cured or have their disease controlled for many years.

Symptoms

The most common early symptom of Hodgkin lymphoma is a swollen lymph node. It is often felt as a painless lump in the neck, armpit, or groin.

Other symptoms include:

Persistent fever
Feeling very tired and weak
Weight loss
Night sweats
Itchy skin
Cough or trouble breathing
Pain in the lymph nodes after drinking alcohol

In most cases, these symptoms are not caused by cancer. However, it is important to see a doctor if you or your child experiences any of them for more than two weeks.

Hodgkin's disease is different from another common form of lymphoma, called non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The two diseases share some similarities, but there are many differences in the response to treatments. This makes the distinction between the two diseases very important.

Diagnosis

The first step in diagnosis is usually a physical examination and medical history. Your doctor will check for swollen lymph nodes and organs as well as general signs of disease. He or she will ask about your health habits and past illnesses and treatments.

If your doctor suspects Hodgkin lymphoma, the following tests and procedures may be performed:

Blood tests – Blood will be drawn from your arm. Various tests will analyze the numbers and appearance of blood cells under a microscope.
Lymph node biopsy – Your doctor will remove all or part of a lymph node using a needle or during minor surgery. A specialist will view the tissue under a microscope.
Bone marrow examination -- a sample of the bone marrow can be removed and examined under the microscope for the presence of abnormal lymphoma cells.
Immunophenotyping – Identifies Hodgkin lymphoma based on of the characteristics of a patient's cells. This process uses chemical reactions to help identify the nature and chemical characteristics of the abnormal cells. These characteristics cannot be seen under the microscope. It represents a way in which specific molecules on the surface of the cells can be identified.


There are two main types of Hodgkin lymphoma. There are also other forms of Hodgkin's disease that are less common. The differences are based upon the appearance of the cells under the microscope. "Classical" Hodgkin disease is more common. The types also differ in the way they look, grow, and spread.

Staging

If you have Hodgkin lymphoma, your doctor will recommend other tests to see if the disease has spread. This process is called staging.

Staging tests may include:

Bone marrow biopsy: Your doctor uses a long needle to remove a sample of bone and liquid bone marrow from the hipbone or breastbone. The sample is viewed under a microscope. In the past, nearly every patient with Hodgkin disease underwent a bone marrow examination. Today, it may not be necessary with the use of other more sophisticated tests listed below.
Lymph node biopsy: This test looks for abnormal cells lymph node tissue.
Imaging tests, such as:
 Chest X-ray – High-energy radiation takes pictures inside the body.Computed tomography (CT) scan -- An x-ray camera rotates around the body making detailed cross-sectional images of tissues and organs.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) – Radio waves and strong magnets produce detailed images of areas inside the body.Positron emission tomography (PET) – Radioactive glucose is injected into the patient's vein. A scanner rotates around the body to locate cells using the glucose. (Cancer cells use more glucose than normal cells and the radioactive glucose shows up as a bright spots on the scans.)Gallium scan – A radioactive substance helps detect rapidly dividing cells.
Laparotomy: During this operation, your doctor will look for cancer in the abdomen. He or she may also take samples of lymph nodes or other tissue. Organs, such as the spleen, may be removed. If the spleen is removed, patients are at greater risk for common infections that may lead to pneumonia and sinus infections. They should wear a medical alert bracelet stating that do not have a spleen. Also they should always have an antibiotic on hand to take if they suddenly develop high fever. Similar to bone marrow biopsy, this procedure is performed infrequently today.

The four stages of Hodgkin lymphoma are based on:

The number of affected lymph nodes
Whether the lymph nodes are located on one or both sides of the diaphragm. The diaphragm is the thin muscle separating the chest and abdomen.
Where the disease has spread
Whether there is spread to organs that are not part of the lymph and immune system


Stage I: Lymphoma cells are found in one lymph node group or in some tissue or an organ outside the lymph system.

Stage II: Cancer is found in two or more lymph node groups on the same side of the diaphragm. Or, it may be in lymph nodes and some tissue or an organ outside the lymph system. All cancer is on one side of the diaphragm.

Stage III: Lymphoma cells are found in lymph node groups both above and below the diaphragm. They may also be found in an area or organ outside the lymph system and/or the spleen.

Stage IV: The cancer is found throughout one or more organs. It may also be in nearby or distant lymph nodes.

Recurrent or relapsed: Hodgkin lymphoma that has come back after treatment.

Resistant: Hodgkin lymphoma that does not go away or continues growing during initial treatment.

There are also letter stages assigned to Hodgkin lymphoma:

A: The patient does not have fever, weight loss, or drenching night sweats.

B: The patient has fever, weight loss, or drenching night sweats.

E: The cancer is found in an organ or tissue that is outside the lymph system but next to an involved lymph node.

S: Hodgkin lymphoma is found in the spleen.

Expected Duration

Hodgkin lymphoma can often be cured. Even when there is widespread disease, Hodgkin's is still curable.

Prevention

Scientists don't know exactly what causes Hodgkin lymphoma. Possible risk factors for the disease include:

Being infected with certain viruses, such as the Epstein-Barr virus (which causes infectious mononucleosis)
Being infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Having a weakened immune system
Having a sibling with Hodgkin lymphoma
Being in young adulthood or older than 55
Being male

Most people with risk factors don't get Hodgkin lymphoma. And most often, people who get the disease don't have clear risk factors.

Treatment

Patients with Hodgkin lymphoma should receive care from doctors with experience treating this illness. A medical oncologist (cancer doctor) or hematologist will likely oversee the team. The team should also include a radiation oncologist, endocrinologist, neurologist, and others.

The treatment approach will vary, depending on:

Type and stage of Hodgkin lymphoma
Tumor size
Patient's age and general health
Symptoms when diagnosed
Whether the cancer has returned
Whether the cancer is getting worse

Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma receive chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or both. Surgery may be part of the diagnosis and staging process. But it is not usually part of the treatment. For patients whose disease has come back, a stem cell transplant may be recommended.


