
Huntington's Disease (Chorea)

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Jan 25, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Huntington's Disease (Chorea)?


Huntington’s disease causes certain nerve cells in the brain to stop working properly. It leads to mental deterioration and loss of control over major muscle movements.  Typically, the symptoms of the illness begin between ages 35 and 50, although they can start as early as childhood or later in life.

Regardless of at what age it starts, Huntington’s disease worsens over time. It is an inherited (genetic) disease. Each child of a parent with Huntington's disease has a 50% chance of inheriting the illness.

Huntington’s disease is relatively uncommon. It affects people from all ethnic groups. The disease affects males and females equally.

Symptoms

Huntington’s disease can affect:

Intellectual ability

Memory loss
Inattention
Dementia


Uncontrollable movements

Twitching
Clumsiness
Dance-like movements
Slurred speech
Difficulty walking
Difficulty swallowing

Uncontrollable emotions

Personality changes
Depression
Irritability
Anxiety or lack of emotions (apathy)

Symptoms vary from person to person. They also can change over time. They usually start as subtle differences and progress to profound disability.

Huntington’s disease is rare in children. In children, behavioral problems and mental deterioration are prominent. Rigidity and seizures are common. Huntington’s disease progresses more rapidly in children than in adults.

Diagnosis

The symptoms of Huntington’s disease begin subtly. As a result, diagnosis may not be made until the disease has started to worsen.

Someone with a family history of Huntington’s disease who has symptoms often is diagnosed based on a physical and neurological exam.

A blood test can detect the gene that causes Huntington’s disease. Everyone who carries the Huntington’s gene eventually will develop the disease. The test cannot predict when symptoms will begin, or how severe they will be.

Genetic testing carries enormous emotional and practical consequences. You should discuss these issues with your doctor. Some people choose to be tested so they can make informed decisions about the future. Other people choose not to be tested, knowing that they cannot do anything to affect whether they have inherited the defective gene.

Many experts recommend that children under 18 should not get a genetic test. At 18, they can decide for themselves if they want to get tested.


Some hospitals offer prenatal testing. If you have a family history of Huntington’s disease, you can determine your risk of passing the gene to your children.

Expected Duration

The gene that causes Huntington’s disease is present from birth. Symptoms typically begin in mid-life. They last until the end of life.

Prevention

There is no way to prevent this disease in people who have inherited the genetic abnormality.

If you have a family history of Huntington’s disease, you may choose to have a genetic test. This can help you to determine your chances of passing the gene on to your children.

Treatment

There is no treatment to cure Huntington’s disease or slow its progression. Several treatments are being tested to see if they can at least slow the progression of the disease.

Therapies can lessen the severity of symptoms. These include speech therapy and physical therapy.

Medications can help to control mood and involuntary movements.

