
Ichthyosis

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Mar 4, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Ichthyosis?


Ichthyosis is the term for severe, persistent problems with dry skin that almost always start in childhood or infancy. Ichthyosis can be genetic (inherited) or can develop later in life. In a large majority of people with the disease, the cause is related to one or more genetic mutations.

Under normal circumstances, the body continuously renews its skin surface, building new skin cells and allowing older cells to be shed from the surface. Ichthyosis disrupts this balance either because too many replacement skin cells are produced or because the skin cells do not separate well from the skin surface when it is their time to drop off. The result is that skin cells accumulate into thick flakes that adhere to the body and can resemble fish scales.

Ichthyosis often causes severe cosmetic concerns for the person with the condition. However, it is not a contagious disease. The condition also can interfere with the skin's critical roles in protecting against infection, preventing dehydration, and regulating body temperature.

Most people with ichthyosis have ichthyosis vulgaris, the mildest form of the disease. It occurs in one out of every 250 people.

Symptoms

Depending on the type of gene abnormality that causes ichthyosis, the skin can show different patterns of flaking. In most cases of ichthyosis vulgaris, for example, skin will flake over the majority of the body, but not on the inside surfaces of joints, in the groin area or on the face.


Symptoms of all genetic types of ichthyosis are either noticeable at birth or appear during childhood. Symptoms may include:

Severe dryness of the skin with thickening and flaking, which may be appear only in limited areas or may involve almost the entire skin surface
Mild itching of the skin
Body odor, because the spaces under and between skin flakes can harbor collections of bacteria or fungus
Wax buildup in the ears, causing hearing difficulties

Certain genetic conditions affect other parts of the body besides the skin, including nerve damage, deafness, or loss of the sense of smell.  Adults may develop ichthyosis due to certain cancers, such as lymphoma.

Skin dryness is usually worse in winter months and in dry climates, because warmth and humidity improve these symptoms. Many people who have ichthyosis vulgaris also have allergic problems, such as allergic nasal congestion, asthma or eczema.

Diagnosis

A doctor usually can diagnose ichthyosis by looking at the skin. A family history is also very useful. In some cases, a skin biopsy will be done to help to confirm the diagnosis. In a biopsy, a small piece of skin is removed and examined under a microscope. In rare instances, genetic testing may be helpful in making a diagnosis.

Expected Duration

Most cases of ichthyosis have a genetic basis and wills last a lifetime. Sometimes, adult onset ichthyosis occurs in association with a disease, and if the disease can be treated, the ichthyosis may go away. In most people, symptoms can be controlled.

Prevention

There is no way to prevent ichthyosis. As with other genetic diseases, there is a risk that children of an affected parent will inherit the gene.

Treatment

Treatment of all types of ichthyosis involves restoring the skin's moisture and facilitating more aggressive shedding of dead skin cells. Regular visits to a dermatologist can help when ichthyosis causes severe symptoms.

To get the best results, use moisture-retaining creams or ointments after a bath or shower, so that moisture is maintained within the skin surface. Petrolatum, lanolin or urea-containing preparations are very helpful in maintaining skin moisture.


Also helpful are medicines that promote shedding of skin flakes. These include lotions or creams that contain lactic acid or other "alpha-hydroxy acids."

If the ichthyosis leads to scratching that causes skin infections, or if body odor is a major problem, antibiotics may be needed from time to time.

