
Osteoporosis

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Sep 12, 2021.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Osteoporosis?


Osteoporosis is a bone disorder. The bones become thinner. They lose some of their strength and are more likely to break. People with osteoporosis have a higher risk of fractures.

Bones can fracture even during everyday movements, such as bending or coughing. The most common osteoporotic fractures occur in the wrist, hip and spine.

Osteoporosis can cause a great deal of suffering, including loss of independence. Death may even occur, especially when the fracture involves the hip.

Hip fractures can be difficult to heal. They reduce the person's ability to move around. This can lead to complications and other health problems.

Osteoporosis is much more common in women than in men. This is because of the hormonal changes that occur during menopause.

Osteoporosis is not a form of arthritis. However, it can cause fractures that lead to arthritis.




Risk Factors

You are more likely to develop osteoporosis if you:

Are female  
Are 50 or older  
Are postmenopausal  
Have a diet low in calcium 
Have an intestinal problem that prevents calcium and vitamins from being absorbed 
Have an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism) or take too much thyroid hormone 
Lead a sedentary lifestyle  
Are thin  
Take certain medications, such as prednisone  
Are Caucasian or of Asian descent  
Smoke  
Drink too much alcohol  
Have a family history of osteoporosis

Symptoms

Most people with osteoporosis do not have any symptoms. They do not know they have osteoporosis until they have a bone density test or a fracture.

One early sign can be a loss of height caused by curvature or compression of the spine. Curvature or compression is caused by weakened vertebrae (spine bones). The weakened vertebrae develop tiny breaks called compression fractures.

Compression fractures cause the spine bones to collapse vertically. When this happens, the vertebrae become shorter. The shape of each single vertebra goes from a normal rectangle to a more triangular form.

Compression fractures can cause back pain or aching. But the loss of height usually does not cause any symptoms.




Osteoporosis usually does not cause pain unless a bone is fractured.

Diagnosis

During a physical exam, your doctor may find that you are shorter than you thought you were. Or, your doctor may notice a "dowager's hump." This is a curve of the spine in the upper back that produces a hump.

X-rays may show that your bones are less dense than expected. This could be caused by osteoporosis. But there are also other possible causes, such as not enough vitamin D. Vitamin D deficiency is common. It is easy for your doctor to diagnose with a blood test.

Your doctor will suspect osteoporosis if you have had a fragility fracture or other risk factors for the disease.

A bone density test can confirm an osteoporosis diagnosis. Several techniques measure bone density.

The most accurate bone density test is DEXA (dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry). DEXA takes 10 to 15 minutes and is painless. It uses minimal amounts of radiation and generally is done on the spine and hip.

A newer test is ultrasound bone density of the heel. It is even quicker and less expensive than DEXA. But it is not widely available or accepted as an accurate screening test for osteoporosis. Usually, people who are found to have osteoporosis by heel ultrasound eventually go on to have DEXA of the spine and hip.




Osteoporosis is a long-term (chronic) condition. But proper treatment can lead to significant improvements in bone mass. It can decrease the likelihood that a fracture will occur.

Bone mass usually does not return to normal after treatment. But the risk of fracture may decrease dramatically after treatment.

Expected Duration

Osteoporosis is a long-term (chronic) condition. But proper treatment can lead to significant improvements in bone mass. It can decrease the likelihood that a fracture will occur.

Bone mass usually does not return to normal after treatment. But the risk of fracture may decrease dramatically after treatment.

Prevention

You can help to prevent osteoporosis by:

Getting enough calcium and vitamin D.  
 Eat foods rich in calcium, such as low-fat dairy products, sardines, salmon, green leafy vegetables and calcium-fortified foods and beverages. Your doctor may also prescribe a calcium supplement.  You may also need to take a vitamin D supplement or a daily multivitamin. 
Regularly doing weight-bearing exercises 
Not smoking 
Avoiding excess alcohol

If you are a woman who has recently entered menopause, talk to your doctor about being evaluated for osteoporosis.

Preventive Medications

There are several medications to prevent menopause-related osteoporosis. These include:

Estrogen replacement therapy (not routinely recommended due to the risks of this treatment) 
Raloxifene (Evista) or bazedoxifene-CEE (Duavee), which combines a medication similar to raloxifene with estrogen). Raloxifene and bazedoxifene behave like estrogen on bone to increase bone density. 
Alendronate (Fosamax) 
Ibandronate (Boniva) 
Risedronate (Actonel) 
Zoledronic acid (Reclast)

Estrogen slows the breakdown of bone. The loss of estrogen during menopause leads to bone loss. Estrogen therapy helps to counteract this process. However, estrogen replacement therapy has fallen out of favor. That is because of side effects, including an increased risk of heart disease and stroke when taken by women more than 10 years past menopause.

Alendronate, ibandronate, risedronate and zoledronic acid are bisphosphonates. This family of drugs slows down the breakdown of bone. They can help bone to become thicker.

If a bone density test shows signs of a problem, it may help you to decide whether to begin taking a preventive medication. You should also measure your height every year, especially if you are a woman older than age 40.

Too much thyroid medication may lead to osteoporosis and other medical problems. Monitor thyroid medication regularly if you take it.

If you take prednisone, work with your doctor to reduce the dose to the lowest possible amount. Or, discontinue the medication if possible.


Treatment

Doctors initially treat osteoporosis by:

Making sure the person gets enough calcium daily and prescribing calcium if dietary sources are not adequate 
Prescribing vitamin D 
Recommending weight-bearing exercises 
Modifying other risk factors

