
Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA)

Medically reviewed by Drugs.com. Last updated on Feb 1, 2022.

Overview
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Duration
Prevention
Treatment

What is Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA)?


A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is an episode of stroke-like symptoms. It usually lasts less than one hour. A TIA is sometimes called a mini stroke.

During a TIA, circulation to a part of the brain is interrupted briefly, and then restored. This interruption can be caused by:

A narrowing of a brain artery because of atherosclerosis. 
A small floating blood clot. This clot enters the bloodstream from somewhere else in the body, often the heart. It temporarily blocks a brain artery.




Symptoms

Symptoms of a TIA are the same as those of stroke. However, TIA symptoms usually last for less than one to two hours. Most TIAs actually last only five to 20 minutes.

Symptoms of a TIA can include:  
Dizziness or confusion  
Weakness or paralysis on one side of the body  
Sudden, severe numbness in any part of the body  
Visual disturbance, including sudden loss of vision  
Difficulty walking, including staggering or veering  
Coordination problems in the arms and hands  
Slurred speech or inability to speak

Diagnosis

Your doctor will ask about:

Your current symptoms  
Your medical history, including conditions that increase your risk of stroke, such as: 
High blood pressure 
Diabetes 
High cholesterol 
Smoking  
Certain types of heart disease

Your doctor will examine you. He or she may pay special attention to the circulation in your neck. This is where major arteries supplying the brain are located. While examining your neck, the doctor will listen with a stethoscope for turbulent sounds. These sounds indicate that blood is flowing through narrowed arteries.

Blood tests will be done. Your doctor will also do a test called an electrocardiogram (EKG). An EKG measures the electrical activity of your heart.

Your doctor may order a computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of your brain. These will help to help pinpoint the cause of a TIA.

To evaluate flow through blood vessels, your doctor may do other tests. These include Doppler ultrasound, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) or X-ray angiography.

If your doctor suspects that floating blood clots are coming from your heart, special heart tests may be necessary.


Expected Duration

The onset of any symptoms suggestive of a stroke or TIA requires immediate medical attention.

You can expect a TIA to last less than one to two hours. If symptoms are not improving quickly within one hour from onset, a stroke is likely to occur without emergent therapy.

Prevention

You can help to prevent TIAs by:

Not smoking 
Keeping blood pressure within the normal range  
 You may need medications to bring down your blood pressure. 
Lowering your LDL cholesterol level  
 For high LDL cholesterol that doesn't respond to diet, statin drugs offer the most protection against TIA and stroke. 
Taking a low dose of aspirin if your doctor determines the benefits outweigh the risks for you 
Exercising regularly  
Eating a healthy diet that is: 
Rich in fruits and vegetables  
Low in saturated fats and cholesterol

Treatment

When treating TIAs, the ultimate goal is to prevent a full-fledged stroke.

Most TIAs are treated with antiplatelet medications. The choices include:

Aspirin only 
Aspirin combined with dipyridamole (Aggrenox) 
Clopidogrel (Plavix) 
Both aspirin and clopidogrel

If you have significant narrowing of part of the carotid artery in the neck, surgery may be done to correct the problem. This will help prevent future TIAs and stroke. The procedure is called carotid endarterectomy or carotid artery stenting.

Some TIAs are related to small free floating blood clots in the heart. These clots can occur in people with atrial fibrillation or advanced heart failure. In this situation, your doctor may choose anticoagulation (anti-clotting) medications such as a direct oral anticoagulant drug.


