Symptoms


The symptoms of APS can include any of the following:

Nervous system. APS can cause:

In a form of APS called Sneddon's syndrome, people have repeated strokes. They also have a mottling of the skin that is lacy purple and white.

Some people with APS develop a syndrome similar to multiple sclerosis. They can have:

Stroke
  Slurred speechDifficulty understanding or forming wordsChange in visionWeakness on one side of the bodyInvoluntary jerking movements of the arms or legsDementiaMigrainesOther problems of the nervous system


Difficulty urinating
Difficulty walking
Double vision
Numbness
Heart and blood vessels. APS can lead to:
 Heart attacks (Up to 20% of younger people who have a heart attack have antiphospholipid antibodies.)
  Heart valve problems that can mimic bacterial endocarditisBlood clots in the upper chambers of the heartDeep vein thrombosis (blood clot in a vein) that can pain and swelling in a leg or arm; these clots can travel to the lungs (see below) and cause difficulty breathing or even death




Blood cells. Some people with a condition called immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) have antiphospholipid antibodies. The primary problem in ITP is low platelets, the blood cells that aid clot formation and prevent excessive bleeding. Over time, some people with ITP develop APS. People with ITP and APS can have problems with excessive clotting and excessive bleeding.

Also, red blood cells can break down abnormally. This may cause fatigue, dizziness and pale skin. This is more common in people with lupus and secondary APS.

Lung. Blood clots in the lung can cause:

Repeated clots can cause elevated pressure in the blood vessels around the lungs. This may cause the person to be constantly short of breath.

Chest pain
Shortness of breath
Rapid breathing


Gastrointestinal. APS can affect the blood supply to the intestines, causing:
 Abdominal painFeverBlood in the stool

APS can cause a condition called Budd-Chiari syndrome. In this syndrome, a blood clot prevents blood from flowing out of the liver. The person may experience:

Nausea
Vomiting
Jaundice (yellow skin)
Dark urine
Pale stool
Swelling of the abdomen
Kidneys. Blood clots that affect the kidneys can cause kidney damage and blood in the urine.
Skin. APS can cause:
 Purple and white mottling of the skinRepeated sores (ulcers)Repeated bumps (nodules)Tissue in the fingertips to die (gangrene)
Eyes. Veins or arteries in the retina can be affected. This can cause blurring or loss of vision.

Pregnancy.


APS can cause problems for the pregnant woman such as stroke or blood clots in the lungs.

APS may be associated with a syndrome of pregnancy known as HELLP. HELLP stands for hemolysis (breakdown of red blood cells), elevated liver tests and low platelets.

In addition, APS may be complicated by:

Recurrent miscarriage which can occur early or late in pregnancy
A partial or complete separation of the placenta from the uterus before the baby is born
A small placenta
Premature birth

