Symptoms

Symptoms of breast cancer include

a lump or thickening in the breast or under the arm
a clear or bloody discharge from the nipple
crusting or scaling of the nipple
a nipple that no longer sticks out (inverted)
redness or swelling of the breast
dimpling on the breast skin resembling the texture of an orange
a change in the contours of the breast, such as one being higher than the other
a sore or ulcer on the skin of the breast that does not heal.

Ultrasound can confirm whether the lump is a solid tumor or a fluid-filled, noncancerous cyst. It can also be used to assess any abnormal areas found on a mammogram.
Although it is not routinely performed, MRI is used to assess abnormalities on a mammogram, get a more accurate estimate of a cancer's size, and check for other cancers. MRI can also be used for screening in woman at high risk of breast cancer. Examples include:

presence of a genetic mutation of the BRCA gene,
a first degree relative of a BRCA carrier
a strong family history  of breast cancer
prior radiation to the chest wall between the ages of 10 and 30.

If the lump is solid, your doctor probably will recommend a breast biopsy. During a biopsy, a small amount of breast tissue is removed and analyzed in a laboratory. Sometimes, your doctor will recommend a biopsy without doing an ultrasound or MRI first.
A breast biopsy can be done in different ways. These include

fine-needle aspiration, which uses a thin needle to withdraw bits of tissue from the tumor
large core needle biopsy, which allows larger pieces of tissue to be removed
stereotactic needle biopsy, a type of large core needle biopsy, which uses special imaging equipment to pinpoint the tissue to be removed
surgical biopsy, which involves removing all or part of the breast lump.

The type of biopsy your doctor chooses will depend on the location of the lump, its size, and other factors.
A specialist called a pathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope determine whether the tissue contains cancer cells. If it does, the pathologist can determine the type of breast cancer.
The pathologist will also assign a grade to the cancer. The grade indicates how closely the cancer cells resemble normal cells. A lower grade means that the cancer is slower-growing and less likely to spread; a higher grade means that the cancer is aggressive and likely to spread. The grade is one factor doctors consider when planning treatment. The pathologist may also determine how rapidly the cancer cells are dividing.
Depending on the type of biopsy and whether neighboring lymph nodes were removed, the biopsy report may include additional information. For example, the report may clarify how much the cancer has spread.
Another important step is to determine whether the cancer cells are "hormone-receptor positive" for estrogen and progesterone. Receptors allow specific substances, such as hormones, to latch on to the cell. Normal breast cells have both estrogen and progesterone receptors.
Cancer cells may have both receptors, one receptor, or no receptors. Women who have hormone-receptor positive cancers generally have a better prognosis. That's because they are more likely to respond to hormone therapy.
The biopsy sample should also be tested for a growth-promoting protein called HER2. The HER2 gene tells the cell to make the HER2 protein. Cancers with multiple copies of the HER2 gene produce too much HER2. These cancers, called HER2-positive, tend to grow and spread quickly.
This kind of information helps to guide treatment decisions. For example, women with HER2-positive cancers are likely to benefit from drugs that target the HER2 protein.
You may need to have additional tests to determine whether the cancer has spread. These include

bone scans
CT (computed tomography) scans
PET scans. PET scans look for metabolically active tissue. They are most useful to look for cancer that may have spread to other parts of the body.


