Symptoms

Diabetes initially might not cause any symptoms. It can sometimes be caught early with a routine blood test before a person develops symptoms.

When diabetes does cause symptoms, they may include:

excessive urination
excessive thirst, leading to drinking a lot of fluid
weight loss.

People with diabetes also have an increased susceptibility to infections, especially yeast (Candida) infections.

When the amount of insulin in the blood stream is too low, extremely high blood sugar levels can lead to dangerous complications. The body can become too acidic, a condition called diabetic ketoacidosis. Or the blood sugar level gets so high, the person becomes severely dehydrated. It’s called hyperosmolar syndrome.

The symptoms of these complications include confused thinking, weakness, nausea, vomiting, and even seizures and coma. In some cases, diabetic ketoacidosis or hyperosmolar syndrome is the first sign that a person has diabetes.

The treatment of diabetes also can produce symptoms. Too much glucose-lowering medicine, relative to dietary intake, can lead to a blood sugar level that has dropped too low (called hypoglycemia). Symptoms of hypoglycemia include:

sweating
trembling
dizziness
hunger
confusion
seizures and loss of consciousness (if hypoglycemia is not recognized and corrected).

You can correct hypoglycemia by eating or drinking something that has carbohydrates. This raises your blood sugar level.

Long-term diabetes can have other complications, including:

Atherosclerosis — Atherosclerosis is fat buildup in the artery walls. This can impair blood flow to all parts of the body. The heart, brain, and legs are affected most often.
Retinopathy — Tiny blood vessels in the retina (the part of the eye that sees light) can become damaged by high blood sugar. The damage can block blood flow to the retina, or can lead to bleeding into the retina. Both reduce the retina's ability to see light. Caught early, retinopathy damage can be minimized by tightly controlling blood sugar and using laser therapy. Untreated retinopathy can lead to blindness.
Neuropathy — This is another term for nerve damage. The most common type is peripheral neuropathy, which affects nerves in the feet and hands. The nerves to the legs are damaged first, causing pain and numbness in the feet. This can advance to cause symptoms in the legs and hands. Damage to the nerves that control digestion, sexual function, and urination can also occur.
Foot problems — Any sores, injuries, or blisters on the feet can lead to the following complications:
 If peripheral neuropathy causes numbness, a person may not feel any irritation or injury that occurs on the foot. The skin can break down and form an ulcer, and the ulcer can get infected.Blood circulation can be poor, leading to slow healing of any foot injuries. Left untreated, a simple sore can become very large and get infected. If medical treatment cannot heal the sore, an amputation may be required.
Nephropathy — This refers to damage to the kidneys. This complication is more likely if blood sugars remain elevated and high blood pressure is not treated aggressively.


