Symptoms

The symptoms of epilepsy vary. They depend on how much of the brain is affected, and where the affected area is located.

Primary generalized seizures:

Generalized tonic-clonic seizure (grand mal seizure) — The person loses consciousness. He or she falls to the ground and temporarily stops breathing. All body muscles tense up at once for a short period. This is soon followed by a series of jerking movements. Some people also lose bowel or bladder control.

The seizure episode may last for a few minutes, during which a person is unconscious. When someone wakes up from a generalized tonic-clonic seizure, they are lethargic and confused. This usually lasts minutes, but it can last hours. There may be muscle soreness and a headache.

Absence seizure (petit mal seizure) — Loss of consciousness is so brief that the person usually doesn't change position. For a few seconds, the person may:

 Have a blank stareBlink rapidlyMake chewing movementsMove an arm or leg rhythmically.


This type of seizure usually begins in childhood or early adolescence.



Partial (focal) seizures:

Simple partial seizure —The person remains awake and aware. Symptoms vary depending on the brain area involved. They can include:

 Jerking movements in one part of the bodyAn experience of abnormal smells, sounds, or changes in visionNauseaEmotional symptoms, such as unexplained fear or rage
Complex partial seizure — The person may seem to be aware, but is briefly unresponsive. There may be:
 A blank stareChewing or lip-smackingRepetitive movements of the handUnusual behaviors, like walking around a room and pulling books off a bookshelf, while not responding to what other people are saying

After the seizure, the person has no memory of the episode.

Status epilepticus —Occurs when a person has a generalized seizure that lasts long enough to raise the risk of death, or recurs without full return to consciousness.  Status epilepticus used to be defined by a generalized seizure that lasted 30 minutes or more. Today, it is defined by one of two features:

Seizure that lasts 5 minutes or more, or
Two or more seizures that occur without a complete recovery of consciousness between the seizures


Status epilepticus is a life-threatening medical emergency that requires immediate medical attention.

