Symptoms

In some people, lupus causes only mild illness, but in others it leads to potentially deadly complications. Symptoms tend to come and go. Periods of intensified symptoms are called flares and periods when symptoms disappear are called remissions. Flares can be triggered by many different factors, including sun exposure, infection, medication and possibly pregnancy, but often they occur for no apparent reason.


Lupus has the potential to affect many different parts of the body, so it can cause a wide range of symptoms including:

Malaise (a general sick feeling) and fatigue
Fever
Loss of appetite
Weight loss
Muscle and joint pain, with pain and swelling of the joints
A butterfly-shaped rash on the cheeks and bridge of the nose, called a malar rash
Skin photosensitivity (a more widespread rash and flu-like symptoms after exposure to sunlight)
Hair loss
A "discoid" rash, which appears as firm, round red plaques with raised borders
Painful ulcers in the mouth, nose and genital areas

Other possible symptoms of lupus include:

Neurological symptoms (headaches, seizures, trouble thinking or stroke)
Psychiatric symptoms, including psychosis, in which hallucinations may occur
Heart problems (abnormal heart rhythms, heart failure, inflammation of the heart muscle or lining)
Lung symptoms, especially pleurisy, which causes painful breathing
Eye redness or loss of vision
Pain or swelling in an extremity due to thrombosis (abnormal blood clots)

Some people develop a form of lupus that involves only the skin, called cutaneous lupus or discoid lupus erythematosus. Another form of lupus follows exposure to certain drugs (drug-induced lupus) including procainamide and hydralazine. While drug-induced lupus may cause rash, arthritis and fever that appear similar to the systemic form of lupus, it tends to be milder.

Women with lupus can have normal pregnancies and deliver healthy babies.  However, pregnant women with lupus are at risk for certain complications such as high blood pressure or worsening kidney function. If the lupus is "quiet" prior to becoming pregnant, these risks are reduced.

Women with lupus tend to have an increased risk of having small birthweight babies.  Babies born to women with lupus may have a rash, low blood counts and heart problems, a condition called "neonatal lupus."

Women with lupus who are planning pregnancy should see an obstetrician experienced in such pregnancies and a rheumatologist. This is particularly important so that medications that may be risky for the fetus can be adjusted or stopped and the lupus can be closely monitored. If the lupus is active, a woman may be advised to delay pregnancy.


