Symptoms

Symptoms of MD vary according to the specific form of illness. The age of onset varies as well.

Duchenne dystrophy — Symptoms usually begin between ages 2 and 4. Leg muscles become increasingly weaker. As a result, the child falls frequently and has difficulty getting up from the ground. The child also has trouble walking or running normally.  The calf muscles gradually get larger, even as the legs become weaker. There also is some weakness of arm and neck muscles. But it usually is not as severe as the leg weakness.  By age 12, many patients are unable to walk independently and need a wheelchair.  In addition, some people with Duchenne dystrophy have mental impairment. They may also have MD-related heart problems.  
Becker-type muscular dystrophy — Symptoms are similar to those of Duchenne dystrophy, but they are milder. They also begin later, usually between ages 5 and 15.  
Myotonic dystrophy — The main symptom is abnormally prolonged muscle contractions and difficulty relaxing the muscles. This is called muscle myotonia. It affects mostly the hands, wrists and tongue. It may develop soon after birth or as late as early adulthood.  There also is wasting and weakening of facial muscles, neck muscles, and muscles of the wrists, fingers and ankles. If the tongue and throat muscles are involved, the patient can have speech problems and difficulty swallowing.  If the diaphragm and chest muscle are involved, there may be breathing problems. 
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy — Symptoms begin in late childhood or early adulthood. They include progressive muscle weakness in the shoulders and hips. Breathing problems occur if the diaphragm is involved. If the illness affects the heart muscle, there may be heart failure or abnormal heart rhythms.  
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy — Symptoms may begin during infancy, late childhood, or early adulthood. Usually, the first sign is facial weakness. There is difficulty smiling, whistling and closing the eyes. Later, there is difficulty raising the arms or flexing the wrists and/or ankles.

