Symptoms

Most people infected with tuberculosis have inactive disease that does not cause any symptoms. In these people, a skin test for tuberculosis (called a PPD skin test, for "protein purified derivative") will show positive results within three months of getting the infection. Once a PPD is positive, it usually will remain positive throughout life.

Among people with active tuberculosis, symptoms vary according to the type of disease:

Primary pulmonary tuberculosis – Some people, especially young children, with this type of tuberculosis have no symptoms other than fever and fatigue. Other symptoms can include: 

 Cough Chest pain Night sweats Poor appetite Problems gaining weight  
Postprimary (reactivation) tuberculosis – Symptoms include: 
 Fever Night sweats Weight loss Poor appetite Weakness Chest pain A general sick feeling

There usually is also a cough, which eventually produces discolored mucus. As the illness progresses, people may cough up blood (sometimes in large amounts), become short of breath and ultimately develop severe breathing problems.

Extra-pulmonary tuberculosis – Symptoms depend on where the tuberculosis has spread. For example, if tuberculosis affects the lymph nodes (about 25% of cases), it can cause swollen glands, usually at the sides and base of the neck. In tuberculosis of the bones and joints (about 8% of cases), the spine, hips and knees are the most likely sites of infection. Joints will become painful and swollen. Genitourinary tuberculosis (about 15% of cases) can cause pain in the side (between the ribs and hip), frequent urination, pain or discomfort during urination, and blood in the urine.  
Disseminated or miliary tuberculosis – Symptoms include: 
 Fever Night sweats Weight loss Weakness Lung problems (cough, shortness of breath, chest pain)


Although the bacteria are spread throughout the body, there may not be any other symptoms. But if there are, they can occur nearly anywhere. Some of the more common symptoms are:

Headaches 
Visual difficulties 
Swollen lymph nodes 
Painful joints 
Scrotal masses 
Skin rashes 
Abdominal pain

