Symptoms

The symptoms of diabetes are related to high blood glucose levels. They include:

Excessive urination, thirst and hunger

Weight loss

Increased susceptibility to infections, especially yeast or fungal infections

Extremely high blood sugar levels also can lead to a dangerous complication called hyperosmolar syndrome. This is a life-threatening form of dehydration. In some cases, hyperosmolar syndrome is the first sign that a person has type 2 diabetes. It causes confused thinking, weakness, nausea and even seizure and coma.

The treatment of type 2 diabetes also can produce symptoms.  Too much glucose-lowering medicine, relative to dietary intake, can lead to the complication of low blood sugar (called hypoglycemia). Symptoms of hypoglycemia include:

Sweating 
Trembling 
Dizziness 
Hunger 
Confusion 
Seizures and loss of consciousness (if hypoglycemia is not recognized and corrected)

You can correct hypoglycemia by eating or drinking something that has carbohydrates. This raises your blood sugar level.

Type 2 diabetes affects all parts of the body. It can cause serious, potentially life-threatening complications. These include:

Atherosclerosis — Atherosclerosis is fat buildup in the artery walls. This can impair blood flow to the all the organs. The heart, brain and legs are most often affected. 
Retinopathy — Tiny blood vessels in the retina (the back of the eye that sees light) can become damaged by high blood sugar. The damage can block blood flow to the retina, and can lead to bleeding into the retina.  Both damage the ability of the retina to see light. Caught early, retinopathy damage can be minimized by tightly controlling blood sugar and using laser therapy. Untreated retinopathy can lead to blindness. 
Neuropathy — This is nerve damage. The most common type is peripheral neuropathy. The nerves to the legs are damaged first, causing pain and numbness in the feet. This can advance to cause symptoms in the legs and hands. Damage to the nerves that control digestion, sexual function and urination can also occur. 
Foot problems — Sores and blisters on the feet occur for two reasons:  
 If peripheral neuropathy causes numbness, the person may not feel irritation in the foot. The skin can break down, form an ulcer, and the ulcer can get infected.  Blood circulation can be poor, leading to slow healing. Left untreated, a simple sore can become infected and very large.  If medical treatment cannot heal the sore, an amputation may be required. 
Nephropathy — Damage to the kidneys. This is more likely if blood sugars remain elevated and high blood pressure is not treated aggressively.


